So the key process of data cleaning is
looking at the
data set that you've loaded into R, and
identifying any sort
of quirks or weird issues or missing
values, or other problems
that you need to address before you can do
downstream analysis.
So the first thing that you're want to
going to be able
to do is summarize the data that you have
loaded in.
So we are going to be looking at this
example data set
here, and this is actually data set about
restaurants in Baltimore.
And so, we collected this data set again
from the web.
And so, if you to this URL and then you go
to export,
you'll be able to see a list of different
versions of this data size.
We're going to look at the csv version of
the data set.
And so we create a data directory, and
again, this is the URL that points to
the CSV version of the data set that
we're going to be talking about, the
Baltimore City data.
And so we're going to download that file
and then read it in with read.csv.
So this is what you remember from reading
data in the internet sources.
So the first thing that you're going to
want to do is look at your data set.
So one thing that you can do is just type
the name of the data frame that we have.
So in this case it could be rest data.
You could just type that in and hit
return, and it will return the entire data
frame.
But often the data frame will be a little
bit too
big for you to be able to see it all very
neatly.
So, the first command we're going to talk
about is the head command.
So if I type head of the data frame that
I'm interested in and I tell it the number
of
rows I should report, it will just show me
the
top three, in this case rows from that
data frame.
By default, it will show me the top six
rows of any data frame.
So if I don't give it the n command or the
n
parameter, it'll just return the top six
rows of the data frame.
The tail command is another command that
will
give you a little bit of the data set.
In this case it will show you the bottom
part o the data set.
So if I pass it this data frame and tell
it n
equals three, it'll show me the bottom
three rows of the data frame.
The other thing that we can do is, we can
use the summary command to
get a little bit of a, an overall summary
of the data set that we have.
So what this will do is, for every single
variable, it'll give you some information.
For variables that are text-based
variables or factor variables,
it will tell you the count of each factor.
So, for example, in this data set, there
are
eight McDonald's and there seven seven
Popeye's Famous Fried Chicken.
For variables that are quantitative, in
this case
it's treating zip code as a quantitative
variable.
It'll tell you the minimum, the first
quartile, the median, and so forth.
So this has already given us an
interesting bit of information because one
of the
zip codes is actually coded as a
negative value, which obviously probably
shouldn't have happened.
You can also use the STR command to give
you a little bit more information about
the data frame.
So, here it tells you the class of
variable it is, it's a data frame.
If it was a matrix, it would tell you it
was a matrix.
It tells you a little bit about the
dimensions of the data frame that you
have.
And then it also tells you all the
different classes that the different
columns correspond to.
So, for example, neighborhood is a Factor,
zip code is an integer, and so forth.
So that, they give you a little bit of
extra information so that you can
know if you need to manipulate things and
change quantitative variables to
qualitative and so forth.
You can use quartile to look at,
variability and quantitative variables.
So, for example, if I look at the quartile
of the councilDistrict variable.
If I, look at that variable I see that the
smallest value is
1 and the top value is 14, and the median
value is 9.
So, you can also tell it to look at
different probabilities.
So, if I pass qurntile probs, it
will look at different quartiles of the
distribution.
So, the zeroth quartile is the minimum
value.
The 0.5 quartile, the medium 99th
quartile.
You can give it a sort of 99th percentile
of the data set.
So you can do this to look at different
percentiles if your interested in them.
You can also make tables.
So another way to look at the data is
to look at specific variables and make a
table.
And so in this case we're making zip code
table and we can see
that only of the varou, one zip code is
coded as a negative value.
You can also see where the bulk of the zip
code values are.
So for example 21201 has a lot of values.
So does 21202 and 21 21224, and so forth.
I've added a little bit here to the inside
the table command.
I say use NA if any.
And so what this will mean, is if there
are any missing values, they'll be an
added column
to this table, which will be NA, and it'll
tell you the number of missing values
there is.
By default, the table function in R
actually
does not tell you the number of missing
values.
So it's important to use the command,
useNA ifany
to make sure that you're not missing
missing values.
You can also make two dimensional tables.
So in this case, I'm again using the table
command.
And now I'm passing in two variables, the
councildistrict, and the zip code.
And so now it breaks down a table
that's two dimensional by zip code and by
district.
And so, for example, you see that district
two has 27 restaurants in the 21206 zip
code.
And so you can do this for different
quanti, qualitative
variables and get a sense of the
relationship between those variables.
The next thing that you might want to do
is check for missing values.
So, the function that could be useful
there is that is.na function.
So, if you used the is.na function and
apply it
to this variable the councilDistrict and
then take the sum
of the kind that is.na, is.na will return
a 1
if it's missing and a zero if it's not
missing.
So, if the sum is equal to zero, that
means there are no missing values.
You can also use the any command.
The any command will just look through
this entire set of values.
In this case, is.na re, returns true or
false, and what it can do
is then check and see if any of these
values are equal to true.
In that case, there would be any value
that's equal to na.
In this case none of the values are na, so
any returns false,
because all of the values are false,
they're not, none of them are na.
You can also look at all all which I can
see if.
So, for example, every single value
satisfy the condition.
So we would hope that all the zip codes
are greater than zero, but it turns out
that
actually one of them isn't greater than
zero, so
you can see that again with that all
command.
Another thing that you might want to do is
take sums, so
for example, you might want to take sums
across columns or across rows.
You can do that with the colsums and
rowsums command.
So here I'm going to take the column sums
of the is.na applied to the entire data
set.
So I've applied is.na to the entire data
set, and that will
be true whenever there's any NA value and
false whenever there isn't one.
And then I take the sum down every column
of that variable, and I
see that there are zero NA values for
every single variable in this data set.
And then I can apply all to the column
sums
and show that all of them are equal to
zero.
In other words, there are no missing
values in this data set.
I can use some other commands to find
specific characteristics within data sets.
So, for example, suppose I want to find
all the zip codes that are equal to 21212.
I could just use the equals equals command
to see if that's true, but I could
also say, are there any values of this
variable that fall into this, this vector
over here.
In this case, are there any values that
are 21212.
That's not very useful when you only have
one value you care about, so, but suppose
you want to find all the zip codes that
are either equal to 21212 or 21213.
Then you can use the %in% command to say,
are there any ZIP
codes that are either equal to one or the
other of these values.
And so in this case you see there's a few
more,
there's 59 values that are equal to either
21212 or 21213.
The
next thing that you can do is you can
actually use this logical
variable that you've created by doing
this, just a subset a data set.
So suppose I want to get only restaurants
that appear on 21212 or 21213, I would
create this logical variable here with the
%in% function.
And then I would pass that to the row
subsetting
component of the rest data variable, and
what would end
up happening is I would end up with only
the
rows that were equal to 212121 or 21213
zip codes.
The next thing you might want to do is
make some sort
of summaries or cross tabs about the data
sets that you observe.
So, for example, I'm loading here data on
Berkeley admissions data.
This is sort of one of the classic data
sets in R.
And so I can create a data frame using
that data set.
And if I do a summary I can see
there are four variables: Admit, Gender,
Department and Frequency.
And so it tells you how many people
each of the different categories are
admitted to vertically.
So one thing you might want to do is make
cross tabs.
So identify where the relationships exist
in this data set.
So what you can do is on the left this is
going to
be the variable that you want to be
displayed actually in the table.
So this is frequency and the table.
And then you might want to break that down
by some different kinds of variables.
So you might break it down by gender and
you
might break it down by weather they were
admitted or not.
So then this tells you the frequency that
males were
admitted, and this is the frequency that
say, females were rejected.
And so when you do cross tabs, you have to
tell
it what data you want to perform the cross
tabs from.
One thing that you can do too is do cross
tabs for
a larger number of variables, but they are
often kind of hard to see.
So here I'm using the warp break data set
which another one of the standard R data
sets.
And I'm actually adding in another
replicate variable just to illustrate this
point.
So, I've got the replicate data sets and
so, I can create an xtabs.
Again where I'm going to have the value
that appears in the table to be equal
to breaks and I'm going to break that down
by all the variables in the data set.
So when I do that, there are three
different variables I can break it down
by.
There's replicate, tension and wool.
And so to create a table like this
I actually have to create multiple two
dimensional tables.
This is a little bit hard to see, because
there'll be a long list of output.
You can make flat tables by taking the
cross
path that you made previously, applying
the ftable command.
And all that will do is it will summarize
the data in a much smaller, more compact
form.
So it's easier to see when you have these
large tables.
The last thing that you might want to do
is
actually just sieve the size of the data
set.
So, here, I've just generated some fake
data with r norm.
And then, what I might want to do is use
the object
size command to see how many bytes that
data set is.
And sometimes that's not very
interpretable.
You might want to know on a different
scale, so you can use the print
command and you can tell it what units
you'd like to see it measured in.
Whether it's megabytes or gigabytes or so
forth.
So those are some ways that you can just
take a
look at your data when you first load it
into R.